DARPA Biospice Use Case for MDL - Model Creation

Andrew Finney afinney@cds.caltech.edu 011 44 1452 722 487
ERATO Kitano SBW Development Group http://www.cds.caltech.edu/erato
California Institute of Technology / University of Hertfordshire 
-------------------------------------------------------------------

Creating Models From Scratch

For the the purposes of defining terms: biochemical networks are
comprised of the following elements [Finney2002]

a) Species 
       These are biochemical entities, chemicals, ions,
        molecules etc.   Species have several properties including
        diffusion rates and initial concentrations in
        compartments and potentially at specific points in space

b) Reactions
        These are operations which transform or move species.
        A reaction has reactant species which are changed into
        product species.  Other species, modifiers, simply
        affect the rate of the reaction. A reaction typically
        has a 'rate' which is an math expression.
        
c) Compartments
        These are volumes which contain species
        
d) Structures
        These define the 2 or 3D geometric representation of
            - the boundary of a compartment.
                A compartment boundary may consist of an
                enclosing space combined with zero or more
                void spaces within the enclosing space.
            and/or
            - a surface over which species and reactions
                may be restricted e.g. a membrane
            and/or
            - a species
            
        A model may contain some definition of how these
        surfaces move either independently or in response
        to some other aspect of the model.

e) Math
        A set of explicit math constraints over the other entities

f) Parameters 
        These are symbols with an associated value.  The symbol can
        be used in place of a value in constraints and rate
        expressions

All these entities with associated metadata attributes
and linkages to external objects.

-------------------------------------------------------------------

Biochemical networks are created and manipulated in the following
forms.  These forms are similar to those used in literature. Whilst
it is perhaps theoretically possible to think of other forms most
modelers are going to want to use these forms which are close to the
forms they are familiar with.  

 -----------
 Graphically
 -----------
 
In this form the set of species and reactions is manipulated by the
user as a graph in the form of a diagram (i.e. the graph is embedded
on the plane).  The notation or style may vary significantly.
Since both species and reactions have more than 2 connections 
they are both technically nodes in these graphs.  Modifier,
Product and Reactant relationships are represented as arcs.
Compartments are defined by dividing the diagram into regions.

In this form the user creates more than a model,
the user creates a diagram of the model.  When saving, loading,
transmitting etc this model the user would expect the diagram 
to available with the model.

Typically notations display modifier relationships differently from
reactant/product relationships.  Many notations allow the same
specie to occur more than once in the graph.

The types of operations that a user would perform in graph editing
environment:

    - Add and Remove nodes - reactions and species
        when adding nodes the user places the node on the diagram
        at specific location of the user's choosing
        
    - Add and Remove arcs - relations between species and reactions
        when adding arcs the user draws the arc along a specific
        route of the user's choosing
        
    - Move nodes maintaining the displayed arcs
    - Display graph at different scales - zooming
    - Change from one notation to another
    - Change from the manually constructed diagram to one generated
        by an algorithm of the user's choosing
    - modify the rate expression for a selected reaction
        - modifier arcs are displayed consistently
    - Display different sections of the same graph - scrolling
    - Hide / display modifier arcs
    - Hide / display arcs and nodes with different metadata
        attribute values, for example hide all reactions and
        associated arcs that are labelled as part of a given
        pathway
    - Modify the properties of the species represented by the
        selected node
    - Delete all nodes representing a given species
    - Add and Remove parameter
    - Set Parameter Value
    - draw the boundary of a compartment
    - remove a compartment boundary 
    - 'implode' : replace a selected set of nodes by a single node
        (this is not a logical transformation of the model
            just a navigational device)
            Arcs between nodes in the selected set are hidden.
    - 'explode' : reverse an 'implode' operation:  replace a
        selected 'imploded' node by its underlying nodes.
        Hidden arcs are made visible.
    
The following is a very incomplete list of graph based
tools for creating models:

JDesigner http://www.cds.caltech.edu/~hsauro/JDesigner.htm
VCell http://www.nrcam.uchc.edu/
Physiome In Silico Cell http://www.physiome.com
Bio Sketch Pad http://bio.bbn.com/biospice/biosketchpad/

Implications:

    - MDL should contain diagrammatic information elements
    
    - These elements should separate information that can be applied
        to a range of styles e.g. relative position of a node and
        information that is specific to a style e.g. thickness of a
        line.
        
    - This representation should support the multiple occurrence of 
        nodes representing the same logical entity.

    - This representation should support the same node
        representing several logical entities
        
 -------------------
 Form based approach
 -------------------
 
This approach employs a non diagrammatic structured user interface.
The user simply enters data into a set of forms each for a different
data type.

The types of operations that a user would perform are:

    - Add and Remove Reaction
    - Add and Remove Species
    - Add and Remove Parameter
    - Add and remove reactant, product and modifiers from reaction
    - Edit Reaction rate expression
    - Edit species properties
    - Edit math constraints
    - Edit Parameter Value
    - Add and Remove a compartment
    - place a species in a compartment
    - edit compartment attributes

Jigcell is the best example of software which employs this approach
http://gnida.cs.vt.edu/~nallen/

 -------------------
 Text based approach
 -------------------

In this approach a conventional text editor is used to edit
a humanly writable/readable text representation of the model.
The syntax of this text representation may be standardized
so that it can be moved between tools.

SCAMP is a good example of a simulator which
reads a humanly writable text presentation of a model
http://www.cds.caltech.edu/~hsauro/Scamp/scamp.htm

Implications:

    - Should the MDL be humanly readable?

    - MDL should contain elements that contain alternative
        text representations of a given model
        
    - MDL elements should be able the contain line and character 
        references.  These references point into the text
        representation, at the syntactic text structure that the
        MDL element represents.

 --------------
 Transformation
 --------------
 
A modeler will wish move a model between these forms.

Implications:

    - diagram elements should be able to coexist with a
        elements containing the humanly readable text form.  
  
---------------------------------------------------------------

The previous sections describe different approaches to
capturing the components of a model that are common to a wide
range of modelling environments. The following
sections describe non-core aspects of modelling which are 
specific to particular to types of models.  It is 
possible that all these elements will be combined into
one modelling environment.
----------------------------------------------------------------

 - Adding geometric structures
 
There are several approaches to creating the
spatial structures required for some models:

    - Drawing spatial structures
 
 For many models employing 2D structure representations it is
 acceptable to simply draw the structures interactively perhaps
 using 2D images from experiments as a background template within a
 conventional drawing package.  
 
    - Mathematical Definition
 
 For some models, especially those containing simple 3D 
 structures, the user can supply an explicit mathematical
 expression describing the geometry of a given structure. 
 
    - Automatic Derivation from experimental data

 The ideal approach is to use image processing algorithms to
 automatically extract the geometric structures from experimental
 imaging data.  For example inputs to this process might be layered
 images generated by confocal microscopy.  In this case the output
 might be the 3D geometry of a cell membrane.

The tool set used to create geometric structures should include
facilities to combine elements from any of the above approaches.

A set of geometric structures should to be linked to the logical
components of the model.  For example a structure representing a
cell membrane might be become the boundary for the cytoplasm
compartment.  Receptor species might be distributed across the cell
membrane.

A scientist will probably will want to model the geometric
aspects of experiments in the same tools used to create the
geometric models of biology for example modelling the effect of
bleaching in a microscopy based experiment.  The experimental
models will thus be closely linked to the model geometry.

The math applied to species and reactions located on a cell membrane
is different from that used in compartment volumes for example
species concentration is modelled in amount per area on a membrane.

An example of software which enables the creation of 
models that include geometric structures is VCell
http://www.nrcam.uchc.edu/

Implications:

    - MDL will need to support two geometric representation schemes:
        a piecewise scheme and an algebraic scheme.

    - Model geometry should be separate from the biochemical network
        to facilitate the geometry's manipulation and use in tools
        that have no concept of biochemical networks e.g. image
        processing tools. 
        
    - The geometry representation scheme will have to be sympathetic
        to the tools that will generate and manipulate the
        geometries as well as to the model simulators.  
        
    - MDL will need to incorporate alternative math to support the
        representations of membranes
        
-----------------------------------------------------------------
         
 - Describing very closely related models 
 
A modeler may wish to model a significant portion of an
experimental system understudy.  For example such a system may
consist of a large set of mutant organisms in addition to the wild
type ostensibly being studied.  In this case a modeler
might create a model of the wild type organism and then simply
describe the differences between the wild type and mutants.  In
practice these differences may be described through changes
in parameter values i.e. the biochemical network topology doesn't
change.  Thus a mutuant model simply consists of one or more
perturbed parameters.

The modeler might perform the following operations on such a set
of data:
    
    - Create a wild type model
    - Create a set of mutants
    - Designate a selected parameter as being 'mutated' in a 
        selected mutant
    - Change the value of a 'mutated' parameter
        (this has no effect on the rest of the data)
    - Edit the wild type model
        the removal of 'mutated' parameters is flagged
    - Verify a model through simulation of the wild type
        and mutant models and the comparison of the
        resulting data against experiment results.

An example of the need for this kind of facility is given by Bray's
group [Morton-Firth1998].

Implications:

    - Is this information to be stored in the MDL or does the MDL
        have a smaller associated sibling language to define
        mutants?
        
    - If we have a separate language then we need to a scheme for
        uniquely identifying parameters in a model i.e. a reference
        scheme.

------------------------------------------------------------------ 
 - collaboration
 
In challenging modelling problems it is likely that models
will be created collaboratively.  Modelers will require the 
same facilities that are available in collaborative software
development environments for managing source code, its development
and its transformation into working software.

The Concurrent Versions System [CVS] http://www.cvshome.org
is an example of a system that that is used to manage
software source code.

There are however there are some aspects of collaborative modelling
where the analogy to software engineering breaks down. In software
engineering the interfaces between components contributed by
collaborators are entirely designed by them. Whereas in biochemical
modelling the modelers may not be able to create simple boundaries
between the components that they are contributing especially when
the combination of components was not anticipated. Instead the
contributed components may have to be merged: either the interfaces
have to be discovered and/or components that are common to more than
one component is replaced by a single component.  In both cases
these processes can be assisted by semi-automated comparison of
the models e.g. looking in particular for species that are common to
both models using a controlled vocabulary.  This is not straight-
forward as the state of a given species may be described in
different ways between components.

Implications:

    - Instances of MDL models should be comparable.  Is it possible
        to compare two biochemical networks efficiently?
            
    - MDL should be compatible with source code control systems
    
    - MDL should support the labelling of elements using controlled
        vocabularies.  The MDL may have to sponsor the development
        of certain controlled vocabularies.
------------------------------------------------------------------- 

 - modularity
 
It is anticipated that Modelers will wish to construct
modular or hierarchical models for several reasons:

    - As way of coping with the complexity of the biology

    - As a mechanism for reusing models as components in larger
        models
        
    - As a natural way to divide up modelling for collaboration
    
    - As a way of creating alternative sub models for use in
        different simulation environments or at different levels
        of resolution
        
    - As a way of describing the hierarchical nature of the 
        biology understudy.  For example where there are several
        instances of the same biological entity located at
        different positions in spatial model.
 
The key issues with modularity in biochemical networks is to
create abstraction mechanisms for the various components
[Ginkel2002]:

    - Compartments - a submodel may contain a biochemical
            network in one or more abstract compartments
            which become concrete when an instance of the submodel
            is placed in a given context
            
            For example a submodel of the citric acid cycle
            has to occur in a cytoplasm compartment however
            the exact compartment is determined when a
            instance is used as part of a larger model.
            
            A more complex example is an abstract model of a
            transport process where there are 2 abstract
            compartments representing the compartments on either
            side of a membrane.

            It is entirely possible for a submodel to contain
            both abstract and concrete compartments

    - Species 
            Again a submodel can consist of concrete and
            abstract species.  A abstract species and a subset of
            the concrete species becomes part of the
            interface of the submodel.
            
            For example a reusable submodel containing a
            representation of the Michalis-Menten reaction would
            have an interface consists entirely of abstract species.
            Whereas a model of a cell may have entirely concrete
            species at its interface.
            
    - Parameters 
            These can appear in a submodel's interface and operate
            in much the same way as passing by value in programming
            languages.

Using such a modularity scheme extends the kinds of operations
that are required in a model creation environment to include:

    - Add an instance of a submodel selected from a library of
        submodels to a model
    - Remove an instance of a submodel
    - Connect abstract species on a instance's interface to a
        concrete species
    - Resolve the concrete compartment for an instance's abstract 
        compartment
    - Edit the properties of a given instance eg location
    - 'Merge' two or more concrete species that are defined
        in this model or on the interfaces of submodels
        
Promot/DIVA is a example of an environment which allows the
user to create hierarchial models in graph form.         
[Tränkle1997]
http://www.sbw-sbml.org/mailing/archive/pdf00001.pdf

Implications:

    - MDL should allow models to be assembled hierarchically
        from submodels with defined interfaces.
        
    - MDL should support alternative "implementations" for a given
        submodel.  These alternatives should be labelled with a
        controlled vocabulary to identify appropriate contexts
        for their use.
        
    - MDL should support the use of collections of submodels
        (libaries) specifically linking mechanisms from models
        to libraries and formats for libraries. 
        
    - MDL should have mechanisms for defining both concrete and
        abstract entities on the interfaces of models especially
        compartments, species and parameters.
        
--------------------------------------------------------------------            
            
 - complex species

The previous section described a requirement for describing 
biochemical network topology hierarchically.  There is also
a requirement for describing species structure and states.

In many models species are composed of subcomponents.
Subcomponents are connected together at specific
binding sites.  Binding sites are located on the subcomponents
but don't necessarily have any geometric properties.
It is possible to represent this as a set of
species where each specie represents a specific topology of
subcomponents however the size of this set can become unmanageable
by a modeler eg several hundred species for a small set of
subcomponents [Goldstein2002].  The work done in Bray's group
using Stochsim [Morton-Firth1998] is another example of modelling
a biological system with a large number of species states.
http://www.zoo.cam.ac.uk/comp-cell/StochSim.html

Note I'm employing a simplification: everything reduces to
subcomponent interactions for example phosphorylation is simply the 
composition of a protein subcomponent with a phosphate group
subcomponent.

Model creation has to provide a modeler
with a mechanism for representing a set of a subcomponents and
their binding sites.  Reactions are then transformations
which compose and decompose topologies of subcomponents.
This approach doesn't actually reduce the combinatorial
explosion unless the modeler can indicate that a given 
binding site state is not relevant to a reaction.  Any
subcomponents connected to the binding site are left unchanged
by the reaction.  

In practice this formulation may not
describe all the complexity of the biochemistry in which
case the modeler would supply rules about the conditions
under which the reaction might occur.  The alternative is further
research into representations of subcomponent graphs which
can capture the full complexity of the biochemistry

There a number of problems with this representation scheme.  Its
very easy to create models with a infinite number of states.  In
general we probably need this facility however
for use with state of the art simulators we probably need mechanisms
to allow a modeler to restrict the number of actual states
simulated.  The use of graphs to represent species is  
problematic as its probably very computationally expensive 
in the general case to match these graphs to determine whether a
given reaction applies to a given species.

Subcomponents will have their own states that are
not related to their binding to other subcomponents, for
example the folding state of proteins.

The operations that are required in model creation are thus extended
to include:

    - Adding and removing subcomponents
    - Adding and removing binding sites on subcomponents
    - Assemble species or classes of species as reactants,
        products and modifier's by connecting instances of
        subcomponents
    - Using these classes of species to form reactions
    
Implications:

    MDL should support the assembly of species from subcomponents.
    
    MDL should support subcomponents with a number of states
    
    In the context of a reactant any subcomponent can have a
    wildcard connection on a given set of binding sites to
    represent a set of species that a given reaction applies to.

    Other ways of expressing reactant states to enable the
    expression of all the biochemical constraints on a reaction is
    required
    
    Computation issues arising from representation mechanisms need
    to be addressed

-------------------------------------------------------------------

Creating Models Using Databases

Models are not created in a vacuum.  The information contained
in a model is derived from a range of public academic data sources,
unpublished experimental data and personal communications with
biologists.  Model creation software should facilitate and record
these processes.

Consider modelling software integrated with Pathway database client
software.   A user could browse a controlled vocabulary to label a
given model element.  The following operations are then possible on
labelled elements

    - querying a species based database to find
        data related to an species or reaction in a model

    - querying a pathway database using either new 
        data or data contained in the model to extract
        a graph of reactions and species describing part
        of a pathway.  The graph becomes a subgraph of the 
        model.

Implications:

    - MDL should have mechanisms for labelling elements
        with controlled vocabularies which can be used as
        keys into public bioinformatics databases
        
    - MDL should store links into these databases
    
----------------------------------------------------------------    

[Finney2002]
"Systems Biology Markup Language (SBML) Level 2:
Structures and Facilities for Model Definitions"
Andrew Finney, Michael Hucka, Hamid Bolouri
Version 1 Working Draft Revision 2
August 26, 2002 

[Ginkel2002] 
"Modular SBML" Martin Ginkel, Max Plank Institute
5th Forum on Software Platforms for Systems Biology 

[Tränkle1997]
Tränkle, Gerstlauer, Zeitz, Gilles: "Application of the Modeling and
Simulation Environment ProMoT/DIVA to the Modeling of Distillation
Processes". In PSE'97-ESCAPE-7 Suppl. Comp. Chem. Engng. (Vol. 21,
pp. 841-846). Trondheim, 1997. 

[Goldstein2002]
Molecular Immunology 1137 (2002) 1–7
"Modeling the early signaling events mediated by FceRI"
Byron Goldstein etal. 

[Morton-Firth1998]
Morton-Firth, C. J. (1998) "Stochastic simulation of cell signalling
pathways" Ph. D. Thesis, University of Cambridge. 