From: owner-sbml-modularity@symbio.jst.go.jp on behalf of Andrew Finney
[afinney@cds.caltech.edu]
Sent: 06 August 2002 14:31
To: sbml-modularity@symbio.jst.go.jp
Subject: [sbml-modularity] suggested modification to Modularity proposal

Folks

I have some comments on, and suggested modifications to, Martin's
Modularity Proposal that he presented at UH this month.

I think this proposal is an important contribution to SBML
development and will hopefully form an important plank
of SBML Level 3.

IMHO its possible improve upon the martin's proposal in the following
ways:

a) More complete interface definitions for sub models

	- the submodel should list what components are
		modifiable by *spec elements

	- the terminals should have attributes which describe
		aspects of the terminals which will affect how they
		might/can be connected at a higher level

b) More strict encapsulation of models
	restrict access to the internals of a model except through
	defined interfaces - this tends to simplify the scheme

c) Simplification:

	to facilitate both the use of terminals in MathML and
	to simplify the scheme I suggest the following:

		i) reactionTerminal identifiers are in the global
namespace
			and can be used interchangeably with species
without
			requiring special attributes on referencing
elements

		ii) specieTerminals don't have their 'own' identifiers
		
		iii) the terminals of submodel instances are
			mapped to global names which can be used
			interchangeably with species without
			requiring special attributes 

	if we do this we don't need to change speciesReference, we can
refer to
	terminals in MathML and we can create rules for terminals
without changing
	the original SBML L2 structures.

d) Some minor details need adaptation to be backwards compatible with
Level 2.

In Detail...

SId
---
In Level 2 we propose to use the type SId which is similar to SName
as the identifier type.  In Level 2 we are proposing to have 'id : SId'
and 'name : string {optional}' on the objects which previously had
name : SName. The modularity proposal should follow that scheme.
I propose that all uses of SNAME and HNAME are replaced
with SId.

IMHO we don't need a distinct HNAME for 3 reasons:

a) if we restrict access to model internals then we refer to internal
components
at only the immediate level.  i.e. names shouldn't need to be
hierarchal.

b) we can eliminate the use of the 'parent' keyword by carefully
defining the scope of the SIds used in attributes on the *Specs
elements.

c) the above simplification (c) eliminates the need for HNAME in
equations

Use of Species
--------------

In level 2 all uses of the term 'specie' are replaced by 'species'

listOfTerminals
---------------

For readability make this list the first list in the model.

listOfInterfaces (NEW)
----------------

This would be the 2nd list in the model and would contain
a list of Interface elements (see below) which define
the set of components that can be affected by *Spec elements.

ModelInstance
-------------
A model instance has a new list of TerminalMap elements.

TerminalMap (New)
-----------

has two attributes:

local : SId

this indicates the terminal on the submodel being mapped

global : SId

the identifier for this terminal to be used within the
containing model's namespace.

Two TerminalMaps with the same local name cannot exist in the
same list.  There doesn't have to be TerminalMap element
for all terminals on the submodel - this implies the terminal
is unconnected - which may be a problem for reaction terminals.

Terminal
--------

has new boolean attribute: determined

true value implies that the species is assigned a value by an
assignment rule.  Internally and externally the speciesTerminal
cannot be attached to a non-modifier terminal or
speciesReference.

has new boolean attribute: modifier

true value implies that the terminal is not created or destroyed
by reactions nor assigned a value by rules.  When true the terminal
internally can only be connected to modifier species references.

A terminal can't have both 'determined' and 'modifier' true 

The 'terminal' attribute is eliminated:  if the terminal
is connected to a submodel terminal then the terminal
has the same identifier as the global identifier for the submodel
terminal.

Namespace rules for *Spec elements
----------------------------------
The fields that refer to a component inside the submodel
(should correspond to an interface element) are in the
namespace of the submodel all other attributes
of the *Spec elements are in the namespace of the
outer model.  I think that should eliminate the need
to have the 'parent' reserved word.

Parameter Spec and Specie Spec
------------------------------
Both these elements have a new boolean attribute
isSubstitutedBy : SId which is identical in function
to the same attribute on CompartmentSpec

SpecieSpec
----------
Do we really need this element given that we have the terminal
structures? 

Rule and Reaction specs
-----------------------
IMHO we should think hard as to whether its a good idea
to allow this degree of 'access' to a submodel.
Local Parameters should be made global for external access.

Interface (NEW)
---------

type of objects that can be placed in the interface list

CompartmentInterface (NEW)
--------------------

derived from Interface, has following attributes:

compartment : SId

indicates that it is permissible to overload this compartment
with a compartmentSpec element.

determined : boolean { use="default" value="false" }

indicates that the compartment has an associated
assignment rule.

ParameterInterface (NEW)
------------------

derived from Interface, has following attributes:

parameter : SId

indicates that it is permissible to overload this parameter
with a parameterSpec element.  

determined : boolean { use="default" value="false" }

indicates that the parameter has an associated
assignment rule.

SpeciesInterface (NEW)
------------------

If we have SpeciesSpecs then we should have this...

derived from Interface, has following attributes:

species : SId

indicates that it is permissible to overload this species
with a speciesSpec element.  

determined : boolean { use="default" value="false" }

indicates that the species has an associated
assignment rule.

we can add further interface types as required.

SpeciesReference
----------------
remove the terminal attribute - (just refer to terminals
via the id on the terminal structure or the global
id  mapped from submodel terminals.) - using the
'species' attribute.

SpeciesRule
-----------

the simplified scheme means we can create rules for terminals
by using a terminal name in place of a species name in the
'species' attribute.

yours Andrew Finney
 
afinney@cds.caltech.edu
+44 1452 722 487
UK: 01452 722 487 - US: 011 44 1452 722 487

ERATO Kitano SBW Development Group
http://www.cds.caltech.edu/erato 

California Institute of Technology / University of Hertfordshire 

